# Chapter Ending

This is a chapter that I should make a summary of, and now it has finally become the time. (I have choosen to write on this GitHub Page to leave time some stamps.)

I have some beliefs and some principles which have led me from P.R.China to Germany. It has been a little bit more than 3 years and 7 months since I arrived in Germany again in December, 2019. I came with some stories behind.


## Coming to Germany

At the beginning of the year when I was about to graduate from the well-known Antai College of Economics and Management, Shanghai Jiaotong University, I was a R&D team leader at a startup legal tech company. It was also a time when I had to make a choice just like about a year ago when I received an invitation to join the startup. That past year has taught me some lesson and let me grabbed a handful spoon of reality in sociaty in China. I quit, although saying goodbye to a salary which could be regarded as very good, because I had lost my passion and turned not so motivated, and most importantly, I would be very much consumed in a short several years if I didn't choose to leave. I knew, I needed to look further away. I returned full-time at my college preparing my master thesis, started an intership at a head security broker company, and was about to join as a full-time employee with a salary which was much less than I earned for my last job, but I was happy because I did (and do) value the oppotunities and resources the platform could offer me to help myself build a good career for the long-run future. However, with the nationalitiy alike system, Hukou, I made the wrong decision to switch to a startup fin-tech company which had less bureaucracy introduced by my team leader at the security company for timely getting my Shanghai Hukou. I had learned my lesson about how an early startup would very much likely turn into with my previous job, but I still made the wrong decision by assuming Shanghai Hukou was important to me and ignored thinking deliberately about whether I would stay in Shanghai for long without starting on a good platform. As the result, in the summer of 2018, 5 years ago, I graduated from a top university, joined a fin-tech startup, got my Shanghai Hukou, and most importantly, I picked up my German again after about 3 years of not using German at all since I graduated as a bachelor with the minor in German. 

Looking back, it seems like my destiny to come to Germany. Yes, and it is also more about my plan. I am smart, I see-through a lot, I think a lot, so I confuse a lot. I didn't think clear about where to go after my study of the typical Chinese education path in the summer of 2015 after exchanged in Technical University of Munich, Germany, graduated as a bachelor in June, 2015, and was about to start my master study. But independence of personality (独立人格) is one of my core value. And I wanted to stay economically independently on my family when some of my bachelor classmates started to earn their lives without continuing a master study. Therefore, I wrote an application to my University of master study for having a gap year to get independently and think more clear about the future. I didn't get approved for the gap year, so I rushed onto the path for my next phase. Then, I started earlist an intership among my master classmates for the desire of independence in 2016. I exchanged again in Europe but this time was in Sweden, a country I had almost no knowledge about, to check whether I could start a life in a foreign environment. And I also indeeded hesitated when I was invited to join the legal tech startup in Februry, 2017, when I just had returned from Sweden, because that was also the time when I had to start my serious career path by doing serious interships. I got a yes by asking for a salary taking opportunity cost into account satisfied. I was willing to join, not really just because of the very good salary. There were more aspects. One of them was also that I thought I was about to do something meaningful in terms of contributing to the whole sociaty by contribution to the bridge of legal education and information technology, and could at the same time gain knowledge and experience in software development which is more internationally universal in comparison to doing interships in big companies of the Chinese financial industry as preparation to join the bigs which was the choice of almost all of my classmates. After a year, I was almost about to return to the normal track like many of my classmates although with the focus on software development at a big in the financial industry. But there came the Hukou issue, and as a consequence, I finally picked up my German plan. Worth mentioning, after about another big half of a year, I indeed got another chance to stay at a relatively big mutual fund company with a salary which could even be higher than my first job in the legal tech startup. I joined and quit within one week. Because I had already been implementing my German plan and I thought it didn't worth it. What is it? It was mainly about the time and about people I would work with therefore grow with. Then I finally got my gap year (at least a big half of), learning German and passing the two parts of the Financial Risk Manager (FRM) exam. And in December, 2019, I came back to Munich, Germany.


## Landing in Germany

I was lucky and unlucky at the same time because of the COVID-19. I was lucky that I had left China not long before the outbreak of COVID-19, otherwise, I might not be able to leave, while unlucky that not long after I arrived in Munich, many companies stopped hiring because of COVID-19. I was super confident because I knew well how good I was including how smart I am and how hard I had worked to build my abilities, but I was also worried. I compromised about the companies and job roles in consideration. And I was also lucky to get hired by my current company. I am very grateful that my current company gave me the chance, although at the time I accepted the offer I indeed had another very likely running offer from a company in the financial industry in Germany, but it was just a hard to tell tiny startup. I liked my current company very much upon joining. It has several aspects I imagined as very necessary for a long-term career plan. It has a long history which I thought would also mean well established and refined software development workflow that I could benefit a lot from working at it; it focuses on one sector (although not the one I had gained my knowledge) which I thought would also mean knowledge and expertise gained in depth with years. It is the German engineering culture aspects I favor. So at the night before I officially joined my current company, I wrote a line like "I wish I could to stay there for more than 7 years" in my long Chinese blog post I shared with my friends in China. Now, it is a bit more than 3 years, and I have to decide to be leaving, although I haven't yet sent out a single résumé since I joined.


## Down to Earth - Fallen

It has been 3 years - target achieved, confused and burnout.

There was a very good first year. Although locked down by COVID-19, I was not really that much influence by it, or in some degree, it was more as what I needed. That was my first real career year outside of home contry, in Germany, I wanted very much to prove myself and it was also still the time when my current company was still relatively more structured and had the room for me to do some long-term planning. I started low, as being humble, and also for the compromise to get a good-enough sastifying job during the COVID-19 epidemic, therefore only asked for a not so promising salary. As I indeed didn't care about money much. Or I care other aspects much more than just money. As always! I worked a lot of more than I needed to in the bigger scope of work. So after a bit more than a year, knowing some colleagues earning much more than me but doing even less, I wrote an email to my managers asking for a salary rise. That was the first time, I got discouraged. I indeed finally got a salary rise, but the process itself was enough discouraging, let alone the degree of the salary rise. I knew that in Germany, big salary rise is not commom, so which bothered me more was not really the among of my salary rise. It was more about willingness, management style and more other aspects reflected by the process of handling my salary rise request. I talked with my group manager who was very nice person and very nice to me (this was one of my lucky things in my current company; but she was not really the decision maker to this salary matter) and sent out my email of this matter in July and Auguest. In my memory, after around 3 months, seemingly like in October or November, I finally saw a first patch of my salary rise. Having some feedbacks, and then if not remmbering wrong, I received another patch of salary rise in December, but as a result of being a part of the whole company - every employee got a salary rise at the end of year 2021. What the process told me? Or how the many months without a observable salary change made me worry? There were quite some aspects I suspected and verified in the coming dates. I am just leaving my current company. There are aspects I would prefer not to write publicly even after I have left my current company, as no matter how the future goes, I am still grateful for once being a part. But as a consequence, my strategy of being a part of my current company had indeed started to change after that period. And I did still need another several months in my current company to make it up to 21 months to get my permanent residency (Niederlassungserlaubnis) in Germany to become more independent in Germany let alone my plan of staying in the same company for about 7 years. The 7 is not an exact number that I was targetting, it is more a wish and indicator of plan - to make continuous investment on one focus to reach the sweet spot of knowing a subject / a environment well and also prove career personality by building facts. I graduated from one of the best business school in the world, by knowing the business world, I like and respect engineering culture even more. This is also in many aspects, Germany and Germans are not smart at all in my eyes, but in a loveable way. This is the part I like Germany especially. However, I saw more aspects in my current company which are not what I expected as German styles. I studied management. And I know well how management affects the effectiveness, efficiency and morale of the whole company.

The salary rise process just got me discouraged but didn't get me confused. I still liked being a part of the well-focused long-history company. As again, money is never the most important aspect I value. What got me confused is the uncertainty of whether there still exists some worth long-term investing subject that I can have my passion on since the start of the so-called OKR change. I cannot comment on how well my current company was prepared before the transition but I did think that I somehow understood the desire of change by the management. I also cannot comment on how good the OKR transition is. But I think I can talk about the influences on me. Change is not always good, especially cannot be good for everybody, or the OKR change for people who hadn't built their solid foundations at my current company. Seniors usually have handles to grab while for juniors it is rather different and difficult. Especially together with the change of no managers at all. Weak team concepts (team gets dissmissed every 3 months), together with no manager, typical juniors are left alone - to care or not is mostly based on past work-friend-ship. The always changing teams and subjects for me mean the big lose of certainty about what worth continous investment of my passion because I am not on hold of what are allowed to do in next cycles which also means no guaranteed continuation and no way to know what to prepare today for the benifit of tomorrow. It was not good time for me since the start at around the beginning of 2022, but I thought I could be patient for the company to realize the necessity of sustainable software development and maintainance after failures of getting aware the importance of knowledge and experience that should be gained with time and focus.

2022 is a very special year for me. It is the year I was entitiled to get my permanent residency (Niederlassungserlaubnis) in Germany in May, it is also the year I started refreshing my knowledge of my university study by praparing Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA) exams, and it is the year when I turned 30 for which I had a 3-day 800-kilometer bike journey from Munich to Berlin with one of my colleagues and supported by my company. The last point is most important to me personally and it also concerns the beyond employment relationship with the company (or gratitude to the company for such support of making it happen). Then second point is in fact a critical point or influencial point to today's situation, in my guess, of course. There is a bit conspiracy theory here. When you have add your colleagues (esp. bosses) on your social network, things will go differently. This could be the setting. I got my exam report of passing CFA level I in July, 2022. It means something to me and I don't want to hide it just because my colleagues may have some thoughts around it. Be frank, I shared the message on LinkedIn. So why CFA in 2022? Because I want to find something meaningful for my time outside of my 8 hours. Because I do not easily quit on what I have chosen and invested already a lot, like studied in university. (Like I may move to France or USA one day, but I am sure, I will also bring my German to level C2 another day.) Because knowledge is something I value. And outside of my 8 hours, I can get my own small business started - like developing finance related Apple app store apps as a software developer. The "conspiracy theory" here is that apperantly, of course in my guess, some of my colleagues have seen my message about passing CFA exam and therefore have resulted pressure and mental burden on me after I moved to Frankfurt am Main - but I still do not regret of sharing my message on LinkedIn. Because I have done nothing wrong and I am the victim.

With the turning of 30, my permanent residency (Niederlassungserlaubnis) at hand, and the lose of direction of good life and good career. I wanted to move to and live in another big city in Europe. There were not many cities in my consideration - Germany had around 2 to 3 which are Hamburg, Frankfurt amd Main and Berlin; France had Paris; UK has London and no more. Germany could have more for me, because I had been at German langauge level B2 in 2020 and indeed had learned about Germany a lot. UK was kind of impossible because of the visa issues. Paris has always been like a big wish - Paris is the homnetown for all who have lost their hometowns - this line has been in my mind for quite some time. Getting allowance to move to Frankfurt as a fallback for the wish to move to Paris for around 2 years is still out of the goodwill or generosity of the CEO of my current company. Looking back, it was not a very clear process and allowance. There are quite some specialties there. I started to communicate my idea of wishing to experience up to 2 years life in Paris with the HR at that time in Octobor, but unfortunitely she left the company in that November. I then started communicating directly with the CEO in November and even got a chance to do a pseudo-business travel to another company owned by the CEO in Montpellier, France, at the end of November, financailly supported by my current company. I am grateful for such a chance and I think I understand such an offer as goodwill of the CEO. As I understand that he has the willness to help young people to explorer a bit and provide financial support by the company. But I am also someone who knows well about that he doesn't need things that he doesn't need and he needs only things he needs. So that journey to Montpellier is not really that enjoyable for me when I was in a confusing state, more or less like a job that I need to do, but still grateful, because my company indeed spent money for me to make the journey. Back to Munich and it was already December. I am worried because of the Christmas vacation although I had been constantly in contact with a friend near Frankfurt talking about finding a place there, so I pushed a bit. I finally got verbal agreement to move to Frankfurt am Main with clauses not clearly defined. That was the time when I had highest gratitude to the CEO and therefore the company and was ready to be more actively contributing to the company.

Things get out of expectation with the start of 2023. Then the following 6 months have made me burnout.


---

The hardest thing when you are about to make big decision is to get people who cares about you and who you care understand you. Luckily, I can communicate with my parents for this matter well.

It also comes down to the lose of passion and trust in it. As the chapter is just ending not ended, and even ended, I am still grateful that my current company in fact helpt me settling down in Germany, so there are aspects I could tell and more aspects I may not be able to tell, publicly on the Internet. 

## Backing to Munich, Nothing but No

It cancels out a lot of beyond employment gratitude to the company. What left is just the 3 year employment general gratitude.

This is about my principles. I sometime compromise, but for some aspects, I don't. I view this requirement differently which leads me to be certain. Munich is nothing not good. Like there is no reason to abandon a job out of no reason. Here comes the reason. Quite worth, I still enjoy doing things although there are no that necesary. I am just trying to find bravery to take a step. I didn't take the step because almost everything seems the same.

I am not going back, simply because I think the job in Munich does not worth me going back. I no longer that much in need of a job, I need more to be ready for my next step. Most importantly, this company shows me a signal of letting me pay the debt which is not owned by me. I am not guilty because I have no cheating on work time in the past 6 months. Out of conspirary, I would not like to be the one who pays the cost which is not resulted by me.

Out of business employment relationship, there could also be other aspects of gratitude which was though to exist, but now vanished. The fact is that I worried more for the past 6 months, although at the end, I no longer care. 



